# SignSage-A-Low-Latency-Landmark-Based-Spatio-Temporal-Feature-Learning-Framework-for-Real-Time-ISL
The automatic translation of the Indian Sign Language (ISL) has undergone considerable amount of research and analysis in order to enhance communication of people having impaired auditory functions. Despite the fact that there are already several approaches, real-time recognition in practical scenarios cannot yet behave in a completely stable manner. The same gesture might be slightly different when done by other people and even minimal changes in speed or position of the hand can influence the output. In conjunction with this, an abundant number of vision-based deep learning methods require high computational power, which is not consistently accessible in ordinary systems. The SignSage system is presented in this work in a more practical perspective, particularly in a CPU based scenario. The system does not process entire frames of images, and instead uses the MediaPipe hand tracking pipeline to estimate 21 landmark points. These points are the simplified version of the hand structure. This coordinate-based representation enhances execution performance. The system does not attempt to make one model perceive all the gesture types; instead, it treats them independently on their behavioral patterns. Custom gestures that are not dynamic, like alphabets and numbers, are processed through the random forest model, whereas dynamic gestures are processed through an LSTM network. This isolation enhances stability. The test was carried out on 36 classes of ISL gesture classes, achieving 94–95% accuracy for static gestures and 80–85% for dynamic gestures. During live testing, it maintained 25–30 FPS on a regular CPU.

Keywords: Indian Sign Language (ISL), Hand landmark tracking, Gesture-based recognition, LSTM networks, Real-time inference, lightweight systems, assistive technologies, Human–Computer Interaction (HCI).
